---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "Using AI in software development"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2023-11-25
published: true
labels:
  - Software Development Tools
---

## Using AI assistance when coding

### Introduction

Despite AI's ability to transform the way we think and work, the topic of AI within education is a touchy one. Some feel it is equivalent to cheating, whereas others feel that learning how to properly use AI will be a necessary skill to have. Within the context of software engineering, it is very useful. There are many great tools such as chatGPT or more specified tools like GitHub Copilot that are very powerful tools in the arsenal of a software engineer.

### Use of AI in class

In my software engineering class, we were allowed to use AI in a majority of our coding assignments. We were encouraged to learn how to be good prompt engineers and discover how we like to incorporate AI into our workflow. In most cases, I did not use AI as I wanted to learn the material on my own and get practice with coding by myself or I felt it was unnecessary. However, there were a few cases in which I made use of AI assistance in my work.

For our workout-of-the-days (short coding tasks for practicing), whether in person or at home assignments, I found that I rarely ever used AI. I found that GitHub Copilot was nice, but that its autocomplete was not accurate around half of the time. It was, in many cases, more a hindrance than a help. As for external tools like chatGPT, I only used them on occasions where I was completely stumped on how to go about a problem. Along with forums like stack overflow, code documentation, and general googling, AI was a tool that I would use to help get myself unstuck. For this purpose, I found that it was sometimes useful. Usually, AI was just a nice supplementation to the other research methods, but in a few cases, it was all that was necessary to find a solution.

For example, in a workout of the day where I needed to implement some functions using underscore, a functional programming library for javascript, I used chatgpt to write out one of the simpler functions for me. I needed a function that takes in an array of objects and returns a sum of one of the fields. Below is the code it returned, which was very clean and which I used in the assignment. This was an exception, as most cases, when I tried to use chatgpt to write functions using underscore, it returned code that was very inefficient and needlessly complex, if it worked at all. 

```
function totalDegrees(data) {

	var sum = _.reduce(data, function(result, item) {
  return result + item['AWARDS'];
	}, 0);
  
	return sum;
  
}
```

One of my favorite uses for AI is in the writing of essays. Engineers are notoriously subpar when it comes to writing prose, but luckily for us, there are tools out there to help, and I believe large language AI tools like chatGPT are one of those. Using AI to write essays completely is almost never a viable option. It leads to material that is often not coherent or concise or does not follow your own thoughts. Instead, I prefer to use it to rewrite sentences or sections that I have already written but feel do not sound the best. Along with tools like Grammarly, which also incorporates AI, chatGPT is a great tool for improving prose in an essay.

For example, in this essay, I have used Grammarly to act both as an advisor (to assist me in writing with better prose) and as an error catcher. This is true for almost every essay I write, as no matter the level of writing competency one has, there is always room for improvement.

### Impact on Learning and Understanding

Personally, I feel AI has been a nice tool to use in my learning. I do not rely whatsoever on AI technology to educate me. Instead, I like to use AI to automate mindless tasks, to help speed up the mundane parts of a task, or to give suggestions for improvement, which I can choose whether or not to implement. In select cases, AI has been helpful in improving my understanding of certain technologies, although that is the exception and not the rule.

### Practical Applications:

In my productivity outside of my software engineering course, I love using Github Copilot to generate unit tests for my projects. I find these to be very well done and a huge productivity booster. Outside of this use, I typically only use AI for templating simple tasks. I have not found any AI tools to be reliable or powerful enough to be worth the use in most tasks that are complex in any way, as policing its output can be as much work as if one had just written out the code or other text themselves.

### Challenges and Opportunities:

As previously stated, AI is a powerful tool, but that goes both ways. AI tools are not good enough yet to rely heavily on. This makes much of its use in education a dangerous game. Going forward, it will continue to be a dangerous game. Misinformation, as well as an overreliance on AI instead of one's own knowledge, are issues that will exist as long as AI is used in education.

### Comparative Analysis:

In my opinion, integrating AI would negatively affect most university courses at this time. The tools are not to a level of competence that I feel makes them useful in many aspects of education. However, I do believe that dedicating a small portion of time to teaching students how to become good prompt engineers is a valid idea. Other than this, I believe that currently, AI should be separate from education. Professors, especially, should not rely on AI to supplement their teachings. 

### Future Considerations:

Although I am not the biggest user of AI software development tools, I feel that as these tools continue to improve, their usefulness will become undeniable. It will be necessary for software developers to become good prompt engineers and be able to comfortably integrate AI tools into their workflow. Just as it is necessary to be able to configure and use an IDE now, using AI tools will be a skill that every good software engineer of the future will utilize.

### Conclusion:

Within my software engineering course, AI was an interesting tool. I used it sparingly, and in the right context, it was useful. It's hard to say what the best way of going about the integration of AI into education is and to what extent it should be used, but it is undeniable that the skill will become evermore valuable in the coming years. I am happy that the course did not shy away from this question and allowed us to make that decision for ourselves.
